Our narrator, Nick Carraway, moves to the East Coast to work as a bond trader in Manhattan. He rents a small house in West Egg, a nouveau riche town in Long Island. In East Egg, the next town over, where old money people live, Nick reconnects with his cousin Daisy Buchanan, her husband Tom, and meets their friend Jordan Baker.

Tom takes Nick to meet his mistress, Myrtle Wilson. Myrtle is married to George Wilson, who runs a gas station in a gross and dirty neighborhood in Queens. Tom, Nick, and Myrtle go to Manhattan, where she hosts a small party that ends with Tom punching her in the face.

Nick meets his next-door neighbor, Jay Catsby, a very rich man who lives in a giant mansion and throws wildly extravagant parties every weekend, and who is a mysterious person no one knows much about.

Catsby takes Nick to lunch and introduces him to his business partner - a gangster named Meyer Wolfshiem.

Nick starts a relationship with Jordan. Through her, Nick finds out that Catsby and Daisy were in love five years ago, and that Catsby would like to see her again.

Nick arranges for Daisy to come over to his house so that Catsby can "accidentally" drop by. Daisy and Catsby start having an affair.

Tom and Daisy come to one of Catsby's parties. Daisy is disgusted by the ostentatiously vulgar display of wealth, and Tom immediately sees that Catsby's money most likely comes from crime.

We learn that Catsby was born into a poor farming family as James Gatz. He has always been extremely ambitious, creating the Jay Catsby persona as a way of transforming himself into a successful self-made man—the ideal of the American Dream.

Nick, Catsby, Daisy, Tom, and Jordan get together for lunch. At this lunch, Daisy and Catsby are planning to tell Tom that she is leaving him. Catsby suddenly feels uncomfortable doing this in Tom's house, and Daisy suggests going to Manhattan instead.

In Manhattan, the five of them get a suite at the Plaza Hotel where many secrets come out. Catsby reveals that Daisy is in love with him. Tom in turn reveals that Catsby is a bootlegger, and is probably engaged in other criminal activities as well. Catsby demands that Daisy renounce Tom entirely, and say that she has never loved him. Daisy can't bring herself to say this because it isn't true, crushing Catsby's dream and obsession. It's clear that their relationship is over and that Daisy has chosen to stay with Tom.

That evening, Daisy and Catsby drive home in his car, with Daisy behind the wheel. When they drive by the Wilson gas station, Myrtle runs out to the car because she thinks it's Tom driving by. Daisy hits and kills her, driving off without stopping.

Nick, Jordan, and Tom investigate the accident. Tom tells George Wilson that the car that struck Myrtle belongs to Catsby, and George decides that Catsby must also be Myrtle's lover.

That night, Catsby decides to take the blame for the accident. He is still waiting for Daisy to change her mind and come back to him, but she and Tom skip town the next day. Nick breaks up with Jordan because she is completely unconcerned about Myrtle's death.

Catsby tells Nick some more of his story. As an officer in the army, he met and fell in love with Daisy, but after a month had to ship out to fight in WWI. Two years later, before he could get home, she married Tom. Catsby has been obsessed with getting Daisy back since he shipped out to fight five years earlier.

The next day, George Wilson shoots and kills Catsby, and then himself.

The police leave the Buchanans and Myrtle's affair out of the report on the murder-suicide.

Nick tries to find people to come to Catsby's funeral, but everyone who pretended to be Catsby's friend and came to his parties now refuses to come. Even Catsby's partner Wolfshiem doesn't want to go to the funeral. Wolfshiem explains that he first gave Catsby a job after WWI and that they have been partners in many illegal activities together.

Catsby's father comes to the funeral from Minnesota. He shows Nick a self-improvement plan that Catsby had written for himself as a boy.

Disillusioned with his time on the East coast, Nick decides to return to his home in the Midwest.